THE CONSTITUTION OF JAPAN November 3, 1946 PREFACE We, the Japanese
people, acting through our duly elected representatives in the
National Diet, determined that we shall secure for ourselves and our
posterity the fruits of peaceful cooperation with all nations and the
blessings of liberty throughout this land, and resolved that never
again shall we be visited with the horrors of war through the action
of government, do proclaim that sovereign power resides with the
people and do firmly establish this Constitution. Government is a
sacred trust of the people, the authority for which is derived from
the people, the powers of which are exercised by the representatives
of the people, and the benefits of which are enjoyed by the people.
This is a universal principle of mankind upon which this Constitution
is founded. We reject and revoke all constitutions, laws ordinances,
and rescripts in conflict herewith.  We, the Japanese people, desire
peace for all time and are deeply conscious of the high ideals
controlling human relationship and we have determined to preserve our
security and existence, trusting in the justice and faith of the
peace-loving peoples of the world. We desire to occupy an honored
place in an international society striving for the preservation of
peace, and the banishment of tyranny and slavery, oppression and
intolerance for all time from the earth. We recognize that all peoples
of the world have the right to live in peace, free from fear and
want. We believe that no nation is responsible to itself alone, but
that laws of political morality are universal; and that obedience to
such laws is incumbent upon all nations who would sustain their own
sovereignty and justify their sovereign relationship with other
nations.  We, the Japanese people, pledge our national honor to
accomplish these high ideals and purposes with all our resources.
CHAPTER I: THE EMPEROR Article 1: The Emperor shall be the symbol of
the State and the unity of the people, deriving his position from the
will of the people with whom resides sovereign power.  Article 2: The
Imperial Throne shall be dynastic and succeeded to in accordance with
the Imperial House Law passed by the Diet.  Article 3: The advice and
approval of the Emperor in matters of state, and the Cabinet shall be
responsible therefor.  Article 4: The Emperor shall perform only such
acts in matters of state as are provided for in this Constitution and
he shall not have powers related to government. 2) The Emperor may
delegate the performance of his acts in matters of state as may be
provided for by law.  Article 5: When, in accordance with the Imperial
House Law, a Regency is established, the Regent shall perform his acts
in matters of state in the Emperor's name. In this case, paragraph one
of the preceding Article will be applicable.  Article 6: The Emperor
shall appoint the Prime Minister as designated by the Emperor shall
appoint the Chief Judge of the Supreme Court as designated by the
Cabinet.  Article 7: The Emperor shall, with the advice and approval
of the Cabinet, perform the following acts in matters of state on
behalf of the people: (1) Promulgation of amendments of the
constitution, laws, cabinet orders and treaties. (2) Convocation of
the Diet. (3) Dissolution of the House of Representatives. (4)
Proclamation of general election of members of the Diet. (5)
Attestation of the appointment and dismissal of Ministers of State and
other officials as provided for by law, and of full powers and
credentials of Ambassadors and Ministers. (6) Attestation of general
and special amnesty, commutation of punishment, reprieve, and
restoration of rights. (7) Awarding of honors. (8) Attestation of
instruments of ratification and other diplomatic documents as provided
for by law. (9) Receiving foreign ambassadors and ministers. (10)
Performance of ceremonial functions.  Article 8: No property can be
given to, or received by, the Imperial House, nor can any gifts be
made therefrom, without the authorization of the Diet.
CHAPTER II: RENUNCIATION OF WAR Article 9: Aspiring sincerely to an
international peace based on justice and order, the Japanese people
forever renounce war as a sovereign right of the nation and the threat
or use of force as means of settling international disputes. 2) In
order to accomplish the aim of the preceding paragraph, land, sea, and
air forces, as well as other war potential, will never be maintained.
The right of belligerency of the state will not be recognized.
CHAPTER III: RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF THE PEOPLE Article 10: The
conditions necessary for being a Japanese national shall be determined
by law.  Article 11: The people shall not be prevented from enjoying
any of the fundamental human rights. These fundamental human rights
guaranteed to the people by this Constitution shall be conferred upon
the people of this and future generations as eternal and inviolate
rights.  Article 12: The freedoms and rights guaranteed to the people
by this Constitution shall be maintained by the constant endeavor of
the people, who shall refrain from any abuse of these freedoms and
rights and shall always be responsible for utilizing them for the
public welfare.  Article 13: All of the people shall be respected as
individuals. Their right to life, liberty, and the pursuit of
happiness shall, to the extent that it does not interfere with the
public welfare, be the supreme consideration in legislation and in
other governmental affairs.  Article 14: All of the people are equal
under the law and there shall be no discrimination in political,
economic or social relations because of race, creed, sex, social
status or family origin. 2) Peers and peerage shall not be recognized.
3) No privilege shall accompany any award of honor, decoration or any
distinction, nor shall any such award be valid beyond the lifetime of
the individual who now holds or hereafter may receive it.  Article 15:
The people have the inalienable right to choose their public officials
and to dismiss them. 2) All public officials are servants of the whole
community and not of any group thereof. 3) Universal adult suffrage is
guaranteed with regard to the election of public officials. 4) In all
elections, secrecy of the ballot shall not be violated. A voter shall
not be answerable, publicly or privately, for the choice he has made.
Article 16: Every person shall have the right of peaceful petition for
the redress of damage, for the removal of public officials, for the
enactment, repeal or amendment of laws, ordinances or regulations and
for other matters; nor shall any person be in any way discriminated
against for sponsoring such a petition.  Article 17: Every person may
sue for redress as provided by law from the State or a public entity,
in case he has suffered damage through illegal act of any public
official.  Article 18: No person shall be held in bondage of any kind.
Involuntary servitude, except as punishment for crime, is prohibited.
Article 19: Freedom of thought and conscience shall not be violated.
Article 20: Freedom of religion is guaranteed to all. No religious
organization shall receive any privileges from the State, nor exercise
any political authority. 2) No person shall be compelled to take part
in any religious acts, celebration, rite or practice. 3) The State and
its organs shall refrain from religious education or any other
religious activity.  Article 21: Freedom of assembly and association
as well as speech, press and all other forms of expression are
guaranteed. 2) No censorship shall be maintained, nor shall the
secrecy of any means of communication be violated.  Article 22: Every
person shall have freedom to choose and change his residence and to
choose his occupation to the extent that it does not interfere with
the public welfare. 2) Freedom of all persons to move to a foreign
country and to divest themselves of their nationality shall be
inviolate.  Article 23: Academic freedom is guaranteed.  Article 24:
Marriage shall be based only on the mutual consent of both sexes and
it shall be maintained through mutual cooperation with the equal
rights of husband and wife as a basis. 2) With regard to choice of
spouse, property rights, inheritance, choice of domicile, divorce and
other matters pertaining to marriage and the family, laws shall be
enacted from the standpoint of individual dignity and the essential
equality of the sexes.  Article 25: All people shall have the right to
maintain the minimum standards of wholesome and cultured living. 2) In
all spheres of life, the State shall use its endeavors for the
promotion and extension of social welfare and security, and of public
health.  Article 26: All people shall have the right to receive an
equal education correspondent to their ability, as provided for by
law. 2) All people shall be obligated to have all boys and girls under
their protection receive ordinary education as provided for by
law. Such compulsory education shall be free.  Article 27: All people
shall have the right and the obligation to work. 2) Standards for
wages, hours, rest and other working conditions shall be fixed by law.
3) Children shall not be exploited.  Article 28: The right of workers
to organize and to bargain and act collectively is guaranteed.
Article 29: The right to own or to hold property is inviolable. 2)
Property rights shall be defined by law, in conformity with the public
welfare. 3) Private property may be taken for public use upon just
compensation therefor.  Article 30: The people shall be liable to
taxation as provided for by law.  Article 31: No person shall be
deprived of life or liberty, nor shall any other criminal penalty be
imposed, except according to procedure established by law.  Article
32: No person shall be denied the right of access to the courts.
Article 33: No person shall be apprehended except upon warrant issued
by a competent judicial officer which specifies the offense with which
the person is charged, unless he is apprehended, the offense being
committed.  Article 34: No person shall be arrested or detained
without being at once infomed of the charges against him or without
the immediate privilege of counsel; nor shall he be detained without
adequate cause; and upon demand of any person such cause must be
immediately shown in open court in his presence and the presence of
his counsel.  Article 35: The right of all persons to be secure in
their homes, papers and effects against entries, searches and seizures
shall not be impaired except upon warrant issued for adequate cause
and particularly describing the place to be searched and things to be
seized, or except as provided by Article 33. 2) Each search or seizure
shall be made upon separate warrant issued by a competent judicial
officer.  Article 36: The infliction of torture by any public officer
and cruel punishments are absolutely forbidden.  Article 37: In all
criminal cases the accused shall enjoy the right to a speedy and
public trial by an impartial tribunal. 2) He shall be permitted full
opportunity to examine all witnesses, and he shall have the right of
compulsory process for obtaining witnesses on his behalf at public
expense. 3) At all times the accused shall have the assistance of
competent counsel who shall, if the accused is unable to secure the
same by his own efforts, be assigned to his use by the State.  Article
38: No person shall be compelled to testify against himself. 2)
Confession made under compulsion, torture or threat, or after
prolonged arrest or detention shall not be admitted in evidence. 3) No
person shall be convicted or punished in cases where the only proof
against him is his own confession.  Article 39: No person shall be
held criminally liable for an act which was lawful at the time it was
committed, or of which he had been acquitted, nor shall he be placed
in double jeopardy.  Article 40: Any person may, in case he is
acquitted after he has been arrested or detained, sue the State for
redress as provided for by law.
CHAPTER IV: THE DIET Article 41: The Diet shall be the highest organ
of the state power, and shall be the sole law-making organ of the
State.  Article 42: The Diet shall consist of two Houses, namely the
House of Representatives and the House of Councillors.  Article 43:
Both Houses shall consist of elected members, representative of all
the people. 2) The number of the members of each House shall be fixed
by law.  Article 44: The qualifications of members of both Houses and
their electors shall be fixed by law. However, there shall be no
discrimination because of race, creed, sex, social status, family
origin, education, property or income.  Article 45: The term of office
of members of the House of Representatives shall be four
years. However, the term shall be terminated before the full term is
up in case the House of Representatives is dissolved.  Article 46: The
term of office of members of the House of Councillors shall be six
years, and election for half the members shall take place every three
years.  Article 47: Electoral districts, method of voting and other
matters pertaining to the method of election of members of both Houses
shall be fixed by law.  Article 48: No person shall be permitted to be
a member of both Houses simultaneously.  Article 49: Members of both
Houses shall receive appropriate annual payment from the national
treasury in accordance with law.  Article 50: Except in cases as
provided for by law, members of both Houses shall be exempt from
apprehension while the Diet is in session, and any members apprehended
before the opening of the session shall be freed during the term of
the session upon demand of the House.  Article 51: Members of both
Houses shall not be held liable outside the House for speeches,
debates or votes cast inside the House.  Article 52: An ordinary
session of the Diet shall be convoked once per year.  Article 53: The
Cabinet may determine to convoke extraordinary sessions of the
Diet. When a quarter or more of the total members of either House
makes the demand, the Cabinet must determine on such convocation.
Article 54: When the House of Representatives is dissolved, there must
be a general election of members of the House of Representatives
within forty(40) days from the date of dissolution, and the Diet must
be convoked within thirty(30) days from the date of the election.  2)
When the House of Representatives is dissolved, the House of
Councillors is closed at the same time. However, the Cabinet may, in
time of national emergency, convoke the House of Councillors in
emergency session. 3) Measures taken at such session as mentioned in
the proviso of the preceding paragraph shall be provisional and shall
become null and void unless agreed to by the House of Representatives
within a period of ten(10) days after the opening of the next session
of the Diet.  Article 55: Each House shall judge disputes related to
qualifications of its members. However, in order to deny a seat to any
member, it is necessary to pass a resolution by a majority of
two-thirds or more of the members present.  Article 56: Business
cannot be transacted in either House unless one-third or more of total
membership is present.  2) All matters shall be decided, in each
House, by a majority of those present, except as elsewhere provided
for in the Constitution, and in case of a tie, the presiding officer
shall decide the issue.  Article 57: Deliberation in each House shall
be public. However, a secret meeting may be held where a majority of
two-thirds or more of those members present passes a resolution
therefor. 2) Each House shall keep a record of proceedings. This
record shall be published and given general circulation, excepting
such parts of proceedings of secret session as may be deemed to
require secrecy. 3) Upon demand of one-fifth or more of the members
present, votes of the members on any matter shall be recorded in the
minutes.  Article 58: Each House shall select its own president and
other officials. 2) Each House shall establish its rules pertaining to
meetings, proceedings and internal discipline, and may punish members
for disorderly conduct. However, in order to expel a member, a
majority of two-thirds or more of those members present must pass a
resolution thereon.  Article 59: A bill becomes a law on passage by
both Houses, except as otherwise provided for by the Constitution. 2)
A bill, which is passed by the House of Representatives, and upon
which the House of Councillors makes a decision different from that of
the House of Representatives, becomes a law when passed a second time
by the House of Representatives by a majority of two-thirds or more of
the members present. 3) The provision of the preceding paragraph does
not preclude the House of Representatives from calling for the meeting
of a joint committee of both Houses, provided for by law. 4) Failure
by the House of Councillors to take final action within sixty(60) days
after receipt of a bill passed by the House of Representatives, time
in recess excepted, may be determined by the House of Representatives
to constitute a rejection of the said bill by the House of
Councillors.  Article 60: The budget must first be submitted to the
House of Representatives. 2) Upon consideration of the budget, when
the House of Councillors makes a decision different from that of the
House of Representatives, and when no agreement can be reached even
through a joint committee of both Houses, provided for by law, or in
the case of failure by the House of Councillors to take final action
within thirty(30) days, the period of recess excluded, after the
receipt of the budget passed by the House of Representatives, the
decision of the House of Representatives shall be the decision of the
Diet.  Article 61: The second paragraph of the preceding Article
applies also the the Diet approval required for the conclusion of
treaties.  Article 62: Each House may conduct investigations in
relation to government, and may demand the presence and testimony of
witnesses, and the production of records.  Article 63: The Prime
Minister and other Ministers of State may, at any time, appear in
either House for the purpose of speaking on bills, regardless of
whether they are members of the House or not. They must appear when
their presence is required in order to give answers or explanations.
Article 64: The Diet shall set up an impeachment court from among the
members of both Houses for the purposes of trying those judges against
whom removal proceedings have been instituted. 2) Matters relating to
impeachment shall be provided for by law.
CHAPTER V: THE CABINET Article 65: Executive power shall be vested in
the Cabinet.  Article 66: The Cabinet shall consist of the Prime
Minister, who shall be its head, and other Ministers of State, as
provided for by law. 2) The Prime Minister and other Ministers of
State must be civilians. 3) The Cabinet shall, in the exercise of
executive power, be collectively responsible to the Diet.  Article 67:
The Prime Minister shall be designated from among the members of the
Diet by a resolution of the Diet. This designation shall precede all
other business. 2) If the House of Representatives and the House of
Councillors disagree and if no agreement can be reached even through a
joint committee of both Houses, provided for by law, or the House of
Councillors fails to make designation within ten(10) days, exclusive
of the period of recess, after the House of Representatives has made
designation, the decision of the House of Representatives shall be the
decision of the Diet.  Article 68: The Prime Minister shall appoint
the Ministers of State. However, a majority of their number must be
chosen from among the members of the Diet. 2) The Prime Minister may
remove the Ministers of State as he chooses.  Article 69: If the House
of Representatives passes a non-confidence resolution, or rejects a
confidence resolution, the Cabinet shall resign en masse, unless the
House of Representatives is dissolved within ten(10) days.  Article
70: When there is a vacancy in the post of Prime Minister, or upon the
first convocation of the Diet after a general election of members of
the House of Representatives, the Cabinet shall resign en masse.
Article 71: In the cases mentioned in the two preceding Articles, the
Cabinet shall continue its functions until the time when a new Prime
Minister is appointed.  Article 72: The Prime Minister, representing
the Cabinet, submits bills, reports on general national affairs and
foreign relations to the Diet and exercises control and supervision
over various administrative branches.  Article 73: The Cabinet shall,
in addition to other general administrative functions, perform the
following functions: (1) Administer the law faithfully; conduct
affairs of state. (2) Manage foreign affairs. (3) Conclude treaties.
However, it shall obtain prior or, depending on circumstances
sudsequent approval of the Diet. (4) Administer the civil service, in
accordance with standards established by law. (5) Prepare the budget,
and present it to the cabinet orders in order to execute the
provisions of this Constitution and of the law. However, it cannot
include penal provisions in such cabinet orders unless authorized by
such law. (7) Decide on general amnesty, special amnesty, commutation
of punishment, reprieve, and restoration of rights.  Article 74: All
laws and cabinet orders shall be signed by the competent Minister of
State and countersigned by the Prime Minister.  Article 75: The
Ministers of State shall not, during their tenure of office, be
subject to legal action without the consent of the Prime
Minister. However, the right to take that action is not impaired
hereby.
CHAPTER VI: JUDICIARY Article 76: The whole judicial power is vested
in a Supreme Court and in such inferior courts as are established by
law. 2) No extraordinary tribunal shall be established, nor shall any
organ or agency of the Executive be given final judicial power. 3) All
judges shall be independent in the exercise of their conscience and
shall be bound only by this Constitution and the laws.  Article 77:
The Supreme Court is vested with the rule-making power under which it
determines the rules of procedure and of practice, and of matters
relating to attorneys, the internal discipline of the courts and the
administration of judicial affairs. 2) Public procurators shall be
subject to the rule-making power of the Supreme Court. 3) The Supreme
Court may delegate the power to make rules for inferior courts to such
courts.  Article 78: Judges shall not be removed except by public
impeachment unless judicially declared mentally or physically
incompetent to perform official duties. No disciplinary action against
judges shall be administered by any executive organ or agency.
Article 79: The Supreme Court shall consist of a Chief Judge and such
number of judges as may be determined by law; all such judges
excepting the Chief Judge shall be appointed by the Cabinet. 2) The
appointment of the judges of the Supreme Court shall be reviewed by
the people at the first general election of members of the House of
Representatives following their appointment, and shall be reviewed
again at the first general election of members of the House of
Representatives after a lapse of ten(10) years, and in the same manner
thereafter.  Article 80: The judges of the inferior courts shall be
appointed by the Cabinet from a list of persons nominated by the
Supreme Court. All such judges shall hold office for a term of ten(10)
years with privilege of reappointment, provided that they shall be
retired upon the attainment of the age as fixed by law. 2) The judges
of the inferior courts shall receive, at regular stated intervals,
adequate compensation which shall not be decreased during their terms
of office.  Article 81: The Supreme Court is the court of last resort
with power to determine the constitutionality of any law, order,
regulation or official act.  Article 82: Trials shall be conducted and
judgement declared publicly.  2) Where a court unanimously determines
publicity to be dangerous to public order or morals, a trial may be
conducted privately, but trials of political offenses, offenses
involving the press or cases wherein the rights of people as
guaranteed in CHAPTER III of this Constitution are in question shall
always be conducted publicly.
CHAPTER VII: FINANCE Article 83: The power to administer national
finances shall be exercised as the Diet shall determine.  Article 84:
No new taxes shall be imposed or existing ones modified except by law
or under such conditions as law may prescribe.  Article 85: No money
shall be expended, nor shall the State obligate itself, except as
authorized by the Diet.  Article 86: The Cabinet shall prepare and
submit to the Diet for its consideration and decision a budget for
each fiscal year.  Article 87: In order to provide for unforeseen
deficiencies in the budget, a reserve fund may be authorized by the
Diet to be expended upon the responsibility of the Cabinet must get
subsequent approval of the Diet for all payments from the reserve
fund.  Article 88: All property of the Imperial Household shall belong
to the State. All expenses of the Imperial Household shall be
appropriated by the Diet in the budget.  Article 89: No public money
or other property shall be expended or appropriated for the use,
benefit or maintenance of any religious institution or association, or
for any charitable, educational or benevolent enterprises not under
the control of public authority.  Article 90: Final accounts of the
expenditures and revenues of the State shall be audited annually by a
Board of Audit and submitted by the Diet, together with the statement
of audit, during the fiscal year immediately following the period
covered. 2) The organization and competency of the Board of Audit
shall be determined by law.  Article 91: At regular intervals and at
least annually the Diet and the people on the state of national
finances.
CHAPTER VIII: LOCAL SELF-GOVERNMENT Article 92: Regulations concerning
organization and operations of local public entities shall be fixed by
law in accordance with the principle of local autonomy.  Article 93:
The local public entities shall establish assemblies as their
deliberative organs, in accordance with law. 2) The chief executive
officers of all local public entities, the members of their
assemblies, and such other local officials as may be determined by law
shall be elected by direct popular vote within their several
communities.  Article 94: Local public entities shall have the right
to manage their property, affairs and administration and to enact
their own regulations within law.  Article 95: A special law,
applicable only to one local public entity, cannot be enacted by the
Diet without the consent of the majority of the voters of the local
public entity concerned, obtained in accordance with law.
CHAPTER IX: AMENDMENTS Article 96: Amendments to this Constitution
shall be initiated by the Diet, through a concurring vote of
two-thirds or more of all the members of each House and shall
thereupon be submitted to the people for ratification, which shall
require the affirmative vote of a majority of all votes cast thereon,
at a special referendum or at such election as the Diet shall
specify. 2) Amendments when so ratified shall immediately be
promulgated by the Emperor in the name of the people, as an integral
part of this Constitution.
CHAPTER X: SUPREME LAW Article 97: The fundamental human rights by
this Constitution guaranteed to the people of Japan are fruits of the
age-old struggle of man to be free; they have survived the many
exacting tests for durability and are conferred upon this and future
generations in trust, to be held for all time inviolate.  Article 98:
This Constitution shall be the supreme law of the nation and no law,
ordinance, imperial rescript or other act of government, or part
thereof, contrary to the provisions hereof, shall have legal force or
validity. 2) The treaties concluded by Japan and established laws of
nations shall be faithfully observed.  Article 99: The Emperor or the
Regent as well as Ministers of State, members of the Diet, judges, and
all other public officials have the obligation to respect and uphold
this Constitution.
CHAPTER XI: SUPPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS Article 100: This Constitution
shall be enforced as from the day when the period of six months will
have elapsed counting from the day of its promulgation. 2) The
enactment of laws necessary for the enforcement of this Constitution,
the election of members of the House of Councillors and the procedure
for the convocation of the Diet and other preparatory procedures
necessary for the enforcement of this Constitution may be executed
before the day prescribed in the preceding paragraph.  Article 101: If
the House of Councillors is not constituted before the effective date
of this Constitution, the House of Representatives shall function as
the Diet until such time as the House of Councillors shall be
constituted.  Article 102: The term of office for half the members of
the House of Councillors serving in the first term under this
Constitution shall be three years. Members falling under this category
shall be determined in accordance with law.  Article 103: The
Ministers of State, members of the House of Representatives, and
judges in office on the effective date of this Constitution, and all
other public officials who occupy positions corresponding to such
positions as are recognized by this Constitution shall not forfeit
their positions automatically on account of the enforcement of this
Constitution unless otherwise specified by law.  When, however,
successors are elected or appointed under the provisions of this
Constitution, they shall forfeit their positions as a matter of
course.  THE CONSTITUTION OF JAPAN (November 3, 1946) I rejoice that
the foundation for the construction of a new Japan has been laid
according to the will of the Japanese people, and hereby sanction and
promulgate the amendments of the Imperial Japanese Constitution
effected following the consultation with the Privy Council and the
decision of the Imperial Diet made in accordance with Article 73 of
the said Constitution.  Signed: HIROHITO, Seal of the Emperor, This
third day of the eleventh month of the twenty-first year of Showa
(November 3, 1946).  Countersigned: Prime Minister and concurrently
Minister for Foreign Affairs YOSHIDA Shigeru, Minister of State Baron
SHIDEHARA Kijuro, Minister of Justice KIMURA Tokutaro, Minister for
Home Affairs OMURA Seiichi, Minister of Education TANAKA Kotaro,
Minister of Agriculture and Forestry WADA Hiroo, Minister of State
SAITO Takao, Minister of Communication HITOTSUMATSU Sadayoshi,
Minister of Commerce and Industry HOSHIJIMA Jiro, Minister of Welfare
KAWAI Yoshinari, Minister of State UEHARA Etsujiro, Minister of
Transportation HIRATSUKA Tsunejiro, Minister of Finance ISHIBASHI
Tanzan, Minister of State KANAMORI Tokujiro, Minister of State ZEN
Keinosuke.
GNU GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE
Version 3, 29 June 2007
Copyright (C) 2007 Free Software Foundation, Inc. <http://fsf.org/>
Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies
of this license document, but changing it is not allowed.
Preamble
The GNU General Public License is a free, copyleft license for
software and other kinds of works.
The licenses for most software and other practical works are designed
to take away your freedom to share and change the works.  By contrast,
the GNU General Public License is intended to guarantee your freedom to
share and change all versions of a program--to make sure it remains free
software for all its users.  We, the Free Software Foundation, use the
GNU General Public License for most of our software; it applies also to
any other work released this way by its authors.  You can apply it to
your programs, too.
When we speak of free software, we are referring to freedom, not
price.  Our General Public Licenses are designed to make sure that you
have the freedom to distribute copies of free software (and charge for
them if you wish), that you receive source code or can get it if you
want it, that you can change the software or use pieces of it in new
free programs, and that you know you can do these things.
To protect your rights, we need to prevent others from denying you
these rights or asking you to surrender the rights.  Therefore, you have
certain responsibilities if you distribute copies of the software, or if
you modify it: responsibilities to respect the freedom of others.
For example, if you distribute copies of such a program, whether
gratis or for a fee, you must pass on to the recipients the same
freedoms that you received.  You must make sure that they, too, receive
or can get the source code.  And you must show them these terms so they
know their rights.
Developers that use the GNU GPL protect your rights with two steps:
(1) assert copyright on the software, and (2) offer you this License
giving you legal permission to copy, distribute and/or modify it.
For the developers' and authors' protection, the GPL clearly explains
that there is no warranty for this free software.  For both users' and
authors' sake, the GPL requires that modified versions be marked as
changed, so that their problems will not be attributed erroneously to
authors of previous versions.
Some devices are designed to deny users access to install or run
modified versions of the software inside them, although the manufacturer
can do so.  This is fundamentally incompatible with the aim of
protecting users' freedom to change the software.  The systematic
pattern of such abuse occurs in the area of products for individuals to
use, which is precisely where it is most unacceptable.  Therefore, we
have designed this version of the GPL to prohibit the practice for those
products.  If such problems arise substantially in other domains, we
stand ready to extend this provision to those domains in future versions
of the GPL, as needed to protect the freedom of users.
Finally, every program is threatened constantly by software patents.
States should not allow patents to restrict development and use of
software on general-purpose computers, but in those that do, we wish to
avoid the special danger that patents applied to a free program could
make it effectively proprietary.  To prevent this, the GPL assures that
patents cannot be used to render the program non-free.
The precise terms and conditions for copying, distribution and
modification follow.
TERMS AND CONDITIONS
0. Definitions.
"This License" refers to version 3 of the GNU General Public License.
"Copyright" also means copyright-like laws that apply to other kinds of
works, such as semiconductor masks.
"The Program" refers to any copyrightable work licensed under this
License.  Each licensee is addressed as "you".  "Licensees" and
"recipients" may be individuals or organizations.
To "modify" a work means to copy from or adapt all or part of the work
in a fashion requiring copyright permission, other than the making of an
exact copy.  The resulting work is called a "modified version" of the
earlier work or a work "based on" the earlier work.
A "covered work" means either the unmodified Program or a work based
on the Program.
To "propagate" a work means to do anything with it that, without
permission, would make you directly or secondarily liable for
infringement under applicable copyright law, except executing it on a
computer or modifying a private copy.  Propagation includes copying,
distribution (with or without modification), making available to the
public, and in some countries other activities as well.
To "convey" a work means any kind of propagation that enables other
parties to make or receive copies.  Mere interaction with a user through
a computer network, with no transfer of a copy, is not conveying.
An interactive user interface displays "Appropriate Legal Notices"
to the extent that it includes a convenient and prominently visible
feature that (1) displays an appropriate copyright notice, and (2)
tells the user that there is no warranty for the work (except to the
extent that warranties are provided), that licensees may convey the
work under this License, and how to view a copy of this License.  If
the interface presents a list of user commands or options, such as a
menu, a prominent item in the list meets this criterion.
1. Source Code.
The "source code" for a work means the preferred form of the work
for making modifications to it.  "Object code" means any non-source
form of a work.
A "Standard Interface" means an interface that either is an official
standard defined by a recognized standards body, or, in the case of
interfaces specified for a particular programming language, one that
is widely used among developers working in that language.
The "System Libraries" of an executable work include anything, other
than the work as a whole, that (a) is included in the normal form of
packaging a Major Component, but which is not part of that Major
Component, and (b) serves only to enable use of the work with that
Major Component, or to implement a Standard Interface for which an
implementation is available to the public in source code form.  A
"Major Component", in this context, means a major essential component
(kernel, window system, and so on) of the specific operating system
(if any) on which the executable work runs, or a compiler used to
produce the work, or an object code interpreter used to run it.
The "Corresponding Source" for a work in object code form means all
the source code needed to generate, install, and (for an executable
work) run the object code and to modify the work, including scripts to
control those activities.  However, it does not include the work's
System Libraries, or general-purpose tools or generally available free
programs which are used unmodified in performing those activities but
which are not part of the work.  For example, Corresponding Source
includes interface definition files associated with source files for
the work, and the source code for shared libraries and dynamically
linked subprograms that the work is specifically designed to require,
such as by intimate data communication or control flow between those
subprograms and other parts of the work.
The Corresponding Source need not include anything that users
can regenerate automatically from other parts of the Corresponding
Source.
The Corresponding Source for a work in source code form is that
same work.
2. Basic Permissions.
All rights granted under this License are granted for the term of
copyright on the Program, and are irrevocable provided the stated
conditions are met.  This License explicitly affirms your unlimited
permission to run the unmodified Program.  The output from running a
covered work is covered by this License only if the output, given its
content, constitutes a covered work.  This License acknowledges your
rights of fair use or other equivalent, as provided by copyright law.
You may make, run and propagate covered works that you do not
convey, without conditions so long as your license otherwise remains
in force.  You may convey covered works to others for the sole purpose
of having them make modifications exclusively for you, or provide you
with facilities for running those works, provided that you comply with
the terms of this License in conveying all material for which you do
not control copyright.  Those thus making or running the covered works
for you must do so exclusively on your behalf, under your direction
and control, on terms that prohibit them from making any copies of
your copyrighted material outside their relationship with you.
Conveying under any other circumstances is permitted solely under
the conditions stated below.  Sublicensing is not allowed; section 10
makes it unnecessary.
3. Protecting Users' Legal Rights From Anti-Circumvention Law.
No covered work shall be deemed part of an effective technological
measure under any applicable law fulfilling obligations under article
11 of the WIPO copyright treaty adopted on 20 December 1996, or
similar laws prohibiting or restricting circumvention of such
measures.
When you convey a covered work, you waive any legal power to forbid
circumvention of technological measures to the extent such circumvention
is effected by exercising rights under this License with respect to
the covered work, and you disclaim any intention to limit operation or
modification of the work as a means of enforcing, against the work's
users, your or third parties' legal rights to forbid circumvention of
technological measures.
4. Conveying Verbatim Copies.
You may convey verbatim copies of the Program's source code as you
receive it, in any medium, provided that you conspicuously and
appropriately publish on each copy an appropriate copyright notice;
keep intact all notices stating that this License and any
non-permissive terms added in accord with section 7 apply to the code;
keep intact all notices of the absence of any warranty; and give all
recipients a copy of this License along with the Program.
You may charge any price or no price for each copy that you convey,
and you may offer support or warranty protection for a fee.
5. Conveying Modified Source Versions.
You may convey a work based on the Program, or the modifications to
produce it from the Program, in the form of source code under the
terms of section 4, provided that you also meet all of these conditions:
a) The work must carry prominent notices stating that you modified
it, and giving a relevant date.
b) The work must carry prominent notices stating that it is
released under this License and any conditions added under section
7.  This requirement modifies the requirement in section 4 to
"keep intact all notices".
c) You must license the entire work, as a whole, under this
License to anyone who comes into possession of a copy.  This
License will therefore apply, along with any applicable section 7
additional terms, to the whole of the work, and all its parts,
regardless of how they are packaged.  This License gives no
permission to license the work in any other way, but it does not
invalidate such permission if you have separately received it.
d) If the work has interactive user interfaces, each must display
Appropriate Legal Notices; however, if the Program has interactive
interfaces that do not display Appropriate Legal Notices, your
work need not make them do so.
A compilation of a covered work with other separate and independent
works, which are not by their nature extensions of the covered work,
and which are not combined with it such as to form a larger program,
in or on a volume of a storage or distribution medium, is called an
"aggregate" if the compilation and its resulting copyright are not
used to limit the access or legal rights of the compilation's users
beyond what the individual works permit.  Inclusion of a covered work
in an aggregate does not cause this License to apply to the other
parts of the aggregate.
6. Conveying Non-Source Forms.
You may convey a covered work in object code form under the terms
of sections 4 and 5, provided that you also convey the
machine-readable Corresponding Source under the terms of this License,
in one of these ways:
a) Convey the object code in, or embodied in, a physical product
(including a physical distribution medium), accompanied by the
Corresponding Source fixed on a durable physical medium
customarily used for software interchange.
b) Convey the object code in, or embodied in, a physical product
(including a physical distribution medium), accompanied by a
written offer, valid for at least three years and valid for as
long as you offer spare parts or customer support for that product
model, to give anyone who possesses the object code either (1) a
copy of the Corresponding Source for all the software in the
product that is covered by this License, on a durable physical
medium customarily used for software interchange, for a price no
more than your reasonable cost of physically performing this
conveying of source, or (2) access to copy the
Corresponding Source from a network server at no charge.
c) Convey individual copies of the object code with a copy of the
written offer to provide the Corresponding Source.  This
alternative is allowed only occasionally and noncommercially, and
only if you received the object code with such an offer, in accord
with subsection 6b.
d) Convey the object code by offering access from a designated
place (gratis or for a charge), and offer equivalent access to the
Corresponding Source in the same way through the same place at no
further charge.  You need not require recipients to copy the
Corresponding Source along with the object code.  If the place to
copy the object code is a network server, the Corresponding Source
may be on a different server (operated by you or a third party)
that supports equivalent copying facilities, provided you maintain
clear directions next to the object code saying where to find the
Corresponding Source.  Regardless of what server hosts the
Corresponding Source, you remain obligated to ensure that it is
available for as long as needed to satisfy these requirements.
e) Convey the object code using peer-to-peer transmission, provided
you inform other peers where the object code and Corresponding
Source of the work are being offered to the general public at no
charge under subsection 6d.
A separable portion of the object code, whose source code is excluded
from the Corresponding Source as a System Library, need not be
included in conveying the object code work.
A "User Product" is either (1) a "consumer product", which means any
tangible personal property which is normally used for personal, family,
or household purposes, or (2) anything designed or sold for incorporation
into a dwelling.  In determining whether a product is a consumer product,
doubtful cases shall be resolved in favor of coverage.  For a particular
product received by a particular user, "normally used" refers to a
typical or common use of that class of product, regardless of the status
of the particular user or of the way in which the particular user
actually uses, or expects or is expected to use, the product.  A product
is a consumer product regardless of whether the product has substantial
commercial, industrial or non-consumer uses, unless such uses represent
the only significant mode of use of the product.
"Installation Information" for a User Product means any methods,
procedures, authorization keys, or other information required to install
and execute modified versions of a covered work in that User Product from
a modified version of its Corresponding Source.  The information must
suffice to ensure that the continued functioning of the modified object
code is in no case prevented or interfered with solely because
modification has been made.
If you convey an object code work under this section in, or with, or
specifically for use in, a User Product, and the conveying occurs as
part of a transaction in which the right of possession and use of the
User Product is transferred to the recipient in perpetuity or for a
fixed term (regardless of how the transaction is characterized), the
Corresponding Source conveyed under this section must be accompanied
by the Installation Information.  But this requirement does not apply
if neither you nor any third party retains the ability to install
modified object code on the User Product (for example, the work has
been installed in ROM).
The requirement to provide Installation Information does not include a
requirement to continue to provide support service, warranty, or updates
for a work that has been modified or installed by the recipient, or for
the User Product in which it has been modified or installed.  Access to a
network may be denied when the modification itself materially and
adversely affects the operation of the network or violates the rules and
protocols for communication across the network.
Corresponding Source conveyed, and Installation Information provided,
in accord with this section must be in a format that is publicly
documented (and with an implementation available to the public in
source code form), and must require no special password or key for
unpacking, reading or copying.
7. Additional Terms.
"Additional permissions" are terms that supplement the terms of this
License by making exceptions from one or more of its conditions.
Additional permissions that are applicable to the entire Program shall
be treated as though they were included in this License, to the extent
that they are valid under applicable law.  If additional permissions
apply only to part of the Program, that part may be used separately
under those permissions, but the entire Program remains governed by
this License without regard to the additional permissions.
When you convey a copy of a covered work, you may at your option
remove any additional permissions from that copy, or from any part of
it.  (Additional permissions may be written to require their own
removal in certain cases when you modify the work.)  You may place
additional permissions on material, added by you to a covered work,
for which you have or can give appropriate copyright permission.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this License, for material you
add to a covered work, you may (if authorized by the copyright holders of
that material) supplement the terms of this License with terms:
a) Disclaiming warranty or limiting liability differently from the
terms of sections 15 and 16 of this License; or
b) Requiring preservation of specified reasonable legal notices or
author attributions in that material or in the Appropriate Legal
Notices displayed by works containing it; or
c) Prohibiting misrepresentation of the origin of that material, or
requiring that modified versions of such material be marked in
reasonable ways as different from the original version; or
d) Limiting the use for publicity purposes of names of licensors or
authors of the material; or
e) Declining to grant rights under trademark law for use of some
trade names, trademarks, or service marks; or
f) Requiring indemnification of licensors and authors of that
material by anyone who conveys the material (or modified versions of
it) with contractual assumptions of liability to the recipient, for
any liability that these contractual assumptions directly impose on
those licensors and authors.
All other non-permissive additional terms are considered "further
restrictions" within the meaning of section 10.  If the Program as you
received it, or any part of it, contains a notice stating that it is
governed by this License along with a term that is a further
restriction, you may remove that term.  If a license document contains
a further restriction but permits relicensing or conveying under this
License, you may add to a covered work material governed by the terms
of that license document, provided that the further restriction does
not survive such relicensing or conveying.
If you add terms to a covered work in accord with this section, you
must place, in the relevant source files, a statement of the
additional terms that apply to those files, or a notice indicating
where to find the applicable terms.
Additional terms, permissive or non-permissive, may be stated in the
form of a separately written license, or stated as exceptions;
the above requirements apply either way.
8. Termination.
You may not propagate or modify a covered work except as expressly
provided under this License.  Any attempt otherwise to propagate or
modify it is void, and will automatically terminate your rights under
this License (including any patent licenses granted under the third
paragraph of section 11).
However, if you cease all violation of this License, then your
license from a particular copyright holder is reinstated (a)
provisionally, unless and until the copyright holder explicitly and
finally terminates your license, and (b) permanently, if the copyright
holder fails to notify you of the violation by some reasonable means
prior to 60 days after the cessation.
Moreover, your license from a particular copyright holder is
reinstated permanently if the copyright holder notifies you of the
violation by some reasonable means, this is the first time you have
received notice of violation of this License (for any work) from that
copyright holder, and you cure the violation prior to 30 days after
your receipt of the notice.
Termination of your rights under this section does not terminate the
licenses of parties who have received copies or rights from you under
this License.  If your rights have been terminated and not permanently
reinstated, you do not qualify to receive new licenses for the same
material under section 10.
9. Acceptance Not Required for Having Copies.
You are not required to accept this License in order to receive or
run a copy of the Program.  Ancillary propagation of a covered work
occurring solely as a consequence of using peer-to-peer transmission
to receive a copy likewise does not require acceptance.  However,
nothing other than this License grants you permission to propagate or
modify any covered work.  These actions infringe copyright if you do
not accept this License.  Therefore, by modifying or propagating a
covered work, you indicate your acceptance of this License to do so.
10. Automatic Licensing of Downstream Recipients.
Each time you convey a covered work, the recipient automatically
receives a license from the original licensors, to run, modify and
propagate that work, subject to this License.  You are not responsible
for enforcing compliance by third parties with this License.
An "entity transaction" is a transaction transferring control of an
organization, or substantially all assets of one, or subdividing an
organization, or merging organizations.  If propagation of a covered
work results from an entity transaction, each party to that
transaction who receives a copy of the work also receives whatever
licenses to the work the party's predecessor in interest had or could
give under the previous paragraph, plus a right to possession of the
Corresponding Source of the work from the predecessor in interest, if
the predecessor has it or can get it with reasonable efforts.
You may not impose any further restrictions on the exercise of the
rights granted or affirmed under this License.  For example, you may
not impose a license fee, royalty, or other charge for exercise of
rights granted under this License, and you may not initiate litigation
(including a cross-claim or counterclaim in a lawsuit) alleging that
any patent claim is infringed by making, using, selling, offering for
sale, or importing the Program or any portion of it.
11. Patents.
A "contributor" is a copyright holder who authorizes use under this
License of the Program or a work on which the Program is based.  The
work thus licensed is called the contributor's "contributor version".
A contributor's "essential patent claims" are all patent claims
owned or controlled by the contributor, whether already acquired or
hereafter acquired, that would be infringed by some manner, permitted
by this License, of making, using, or selling its contributor version,
but do not include claims that would be infringed only as a
consequence of further modification of the contributor version.  For
purposes of this definition, "control" includes the right to grant
patent sublicenses in a manner consistent with the requirements of
this License.
Each contributor grants you a non-exclusive, worldwide, royalty-free
patent license under the contributor's essential patent claims, to
make, use, sell, offer for sale, import and otherwise run, modify and
propagate the contents of its contributor version.
In the following three paragraphs, a "patent license" is any express
agreement or commitment, however denominated, not to enforce a patent
(such as an express permission to practice a patent or covenant not to
sue for patent infringement).  To "grant" such a patent license to a
party means to make such an agreement or commitment not to enforce a
patent against the party.
If you convey a covered work, knowingly relying on a patent license,
and the Corresponding Source of the work is not available for anyone
to copy, free of charge and under the terms of this License, through a
publicly available network server or other readily accessible means,
then you must either (1) cause the Corresponding Source to be so
available, or (2) arrange to deprive yourself of the benefit of the
patent license for this particular work, or (3) arrange, in a manner
consistent with the requirements of this License, to extend the patent
license to downstream recipients.  "Knowingly relying" means you have
actual knowledge that, but for the patent license, your conveying the
covered work in a country, or your recipient's use of the covered work
in a country, would infringe one or more identifiable patents in that
country that you have reason to believe are valid.
If, pursuant to or in connection with a single transaction or
arrangement, you convey, or propagate by procuring conveyance of, a
covered work, and grant a patent license to some of the parties
receiving the covered work authorizing them to use, propagate, modify
or convey a specific copy of the covered work, then the patent license
you grant is automatically extended to all recipients of the covered
work and works based on it.
A patent license is "discriminatory" if it does not include within
the scope of its coverage, prohibits the exercise of, or is
conditioned on the non-exercise of one or more of the rights that are
specifically granted under this License.  You may not convey a covered
work if you are a party to an arrangement with a third party that is
in the business of distributing software, under which you make payment
to the third party based on the extent of your activity of conveying
the work, and under which the third party grants, to any of the
parties who would receive the covered work from you, a discriminatory
patent license (a) in connection with copies of the covered work
conveyed by you (or copies made from those copies), or (b) primarily
for and in connection with specific products or compilations that
contain the covered work, unless you entered into that arrangement,
or that patent license was granted, prior to 28 March 2007.
Nothing in this License shall be construed as excluding or limiting
any implied license or other defenses to infringement that may
otherwise be available to you under applicable patent law.
12. No Surrender of Others' Freedom.
If conditions are imposed on you (whether by court order, agreement or
otherwise) that contradict the conditions of this License, they do not
excuse you from the conditions of this License.  If you cannot convey a
covered work so as to satisfy simultaneously your obligations under this
License and any other pertinent obligations, then as a consequence you may
not convey it at all.  For example, if you agree to terms that obligate you
to collect a royalty for further conveying from those to whom you convey
the Program, the only way you could satisfy both those terms and this
License would be to refrain entirely from conveying the Program.
13. Use with the GNU Affero General Public License.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this License, you have
permission to link or combine any covered work with a work licensed
under version 3 of the GNU Affero General Public License into a single
combined work, and to convey the resulting work.  The terms of this
License will continue to apply to the part which is the covered work,
but the special requirements of the GNU Affero General Public License,
section 13, concerning interaction through a network will apply to the
combination as such.
14. Revised Versions of this License.
The Free Software Foundation may publish revised and/or new versions of
the GNU General Public License from time to time.  Such new versions will
be similar in spirit to the present version, but may differ in detail to
address new problems or concerns.
Each version is given a distinguishing version number.  If the
Program specifies that a certain numbered version of the GNU General
Public License "or any later version" applies to it, you have the
option of following the terms and conditions either of that numbered
version or of any later version published by the Free Software
Foundation.  If the Program does not specify a version number of the
GNU General Public License, you may choose any version ever published
by the Free Software Foundation.
If the Program specifies that a proxy can decide which future
versions of the GNU General Public License can be used, that proxy's
public statement of acceptance of a version permanently authorizes you
to choose that version for the Program.
Later license versions may give you additional or different
permissions.  However, no additional obligations are imposed on any
author or copyright holder as a result of your choosing to follow a
later version.
15. Disclaimer of Warranty.
THERE IS NO WARRANTY FOR THE PROGRAM, TO THE EXTENT PERMITTED BY
APPLICABLE LAW.  EXCEPT WHEN OTHERWISE STATED IN WRITING THE COPYRIGHT
HOLDERS AND/OR OTHER PARTIES PROVIDE THE PROGRAM "AS IS" WITHOUT WARRANTY
OF ANY KIND, EITHER EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO,
THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
PURPOSE.  THE ENTIRE RISK AS TO THE QUALITY AND PERFORMANCE OF THE PROGRAM
IS WITH YOU.  SHOULD THE PROGRAM PROVE DEFECTIVE, YOU ASSUME THE COST OF
ALL NECESSARY SERVICING, REPAIR OR CORRECTION.
16. Limitation of Liability.
IN NO EVENT UNLESS REQUIRED BY APPLICABLE LAW OR AGREED TO IN WRITING
WILL ANY COPYRIGHT HOLDER, OR ANY OTHER PARTY WHO MODIFIES AND/OR CONVEYS
THE PROGRAM AS PERMITTED ABOVE, BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR DAMAGES, INCLUDING ANY
GENERAL, SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES ARISING OUT OF THE
USE OR INABILITY TO USE THE PROGRAM (INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO LOSS OF
DATA OR DATA BEING RENDERED INACCURATE OR LOSSES SUSTAINED BY YOU OR THIRD
PARTIES OR A FAILURE OF THE PROGRAM TO OPERATE WITH ANY OTHER PROGRAMS),
EVEN IF SUCH HOLDER OR OTHER PARTY HAS BEEN ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
SUCH DAMAGES.
17. Interpretation of Sections 15 and 16.
If the disclaimer of warranty and limitation of liability provided
above cannot be given local legal effect according to their terms,
reviewing courts shall apply local law that most closely approximates
an absolute waiver of all civil liability in connection with the
Program, unless a warranty or assumption of liability accompanies a
copy of the Program in return for a fee.
END OF TERMS AND CONDITIONS
How to Apply These Terms to Your New Programs
If you develop a new program, and you want it to be of the greatest
possible use to the public, the best way to achieve this is to make it
free software which everyone can redistribute and change under these terms.
To do so, attach the following notices to the program.  It is safest
to attach them to the start of each source file to most effectively
state the exclusion of warranty; and each file should have at least
the "copyright" line and a pointer to where the full notice is found.
<one line to give the program's name and a brief idea of what it does.>
Copyright (C) <year>  <name of author>
This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
(at your option) any later version.
This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU General Public License for more details.
You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with this program.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
Also add information on how to contact you by electronic and paper mail.
If the program does terminal interaction, make it output a short
notice like this when it starts in an interactive mode:
<program>  Copyright (C) <year>  <name of author>
This program comes with ABSOLUTELY NO WARRANTY; for details type `show w'.
This is free software, and you are welcome to redistribute it
under certain conditions; type `show c' for details.
The hypothetical commands `show w' and `show c' should show the appropriate
parts of the General Public License.  Of course, your program's commands
might be different; for a GUI interface, you would use an "about box".
You should also get your employer (if you work as a programmer) or school,
if any, to sign a "copyright disclaimer" for the program, if necessary.
For more information on this, and how to apply and follow the GNU GPL, see
<http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
The GNU General Public License does not permit incorporating your program
into proprietary programs.  If your program is a subroutine library, you
may consider it more useful to permit linking proprietary applications with
the library.  If this is what you want to do, use the GNU Lesser General
Public License instead of this License.  But first, please read
<http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/why-not-lgpl.html>.
Call me Ishmael. Some years ago -- never mind how long precisely -- having
little or no money in my purse, and nothing particular to interest me
on shore, I thought I would sail about a little and see the watery
part of the world. It is a way I have of driving off the spleen and
regulating the circulation. Whenever I find myself growing grim about
the mouth; whenever it is a damp, drizzly November in my soul;
whenever I find myself involuntarily pausing before coffin warehouses,
and bringing up the rear of every funeral I meet; and especially
whenever my hypos get such an upper hand of me, that it requires a
strong moral principle to prevent me from deliberately stepping into
the street, and methodically knocking people's hats off--then, I
account it high time to get to sea as soon as I can. This is my
substitute for pistol and ball. With a philosophical flourish Cato
throws himself upon his sword; I quietly take to the ship. There is
nothing surprising in this. If they but knew it, almost all men in
their degree, some time or other, cherish very nearly the same
feelings towards the ocean with me.
There now is your insular city of the Manhattoes, belted round by
wharves as Indian isles by coral reefs--commerce surrounds it with her
surf. Right and left, the streets take you waterward. Its extreme
downtown is the battery, where that noble mole is washed by waves, and
cooled by breezes, which a few hours previous were out of sight of
land. Look at the crowds of water-gazers there.
Circumambulate the city of a dreamy Sabbath afternoon. Go from
Corlears Hook to Coenties Slip, and from thence, by Whitehall,
northward. What do you see?--Posted like silent sentinels all around
the town, stand thousands upon thousands of mortal men fixed in ocean
reveries. Some leaning against the spiles; some seated upon the
pier-heads; some looking over the bulwarks of ships from China; some
high aloft in the rigging, as if striving to get a still better
seaward peep. But these are all landsmen; of week days pent up in lath
and plaster--tied to counters, nailed to benches, clinched to
desks. How then is this? Are the green fields gone? What do they here?
But look! here come more crowds, pacing straight for the water, and
seemingly bound for a dive. Strange! Nothing will content them but the
extremest limit of the land; loitering under the shady lee of yonder
warehouses will not suffice. No. They must get just as nigh the water
as they possibly can without falling in. And there they stand--miles of
them--leagues. Inlanders all, they come from lanes and alleys, streets
and avenues--north, east, south, and west. Yet here they all
unite. Tell me, does the magnetic virtue of the needles of the
compasses of all those ships attract them thither?
Once more. Say you are in the country; in some high land of
lakes. Take almost any path you please, and ten to one it carries you
down in a dale, and leaves you there by a pool in the stream. There is
magic in it. Let the most absent-minded of men be plunged in his
deepest reveries--stand that man on his legs, set his feet a-going, and
he will infallibly lead you to water, if water there be in all that
region. Should you ever be athirst in the great American desert, try
this experiment, if your caravan happen to be supplied with a
metaphysical professor. Yes, as every one knows, meditation and water
are wedded for ever.
But here is an artist. He desires to paint you the dreamiest,
shadiest, quietest, most enchanting bit of romantic landscape in all
the valley of the Saco. What is the chief element he employs? There
stand his trees, each with a hollow trunk, as if a hermit and a
crucifix were within; and here sleeps his meadow, and there sleep his
cattle; and up from yonder cottage goes a sleepy smoke. Deep into
distant woodlands winds a mazy way, reaching to overlapping spurs of
mountains bathed in their hill-side blue. But though the picture lies
thus tranced, and though this pine-tree shakes down its sighs like
leaves upon this shepherd's head, yet all were vain, unless the
shepherd's eye were fixed upon the magic stream before him. Go visit
the Prairies in June, when for scores on scores of miles you wade
knee-deep among Tiger-lilies--what is the one charm
wanting?--Water--there is not a drop of water there! Were Niagara but a
cataract of sand, would you travel your thousand miles to see it? Why
did the poor poet of Tennessee, upon suddenly receiving two handfuls
of silver, deliberate whether to buy him a coat, which he sadly
needed, or invest his money in a pedestrian trip to Rockaway Beach?
Why is almost every robust healthy boy with a robust healthy soul in
him, at some time or other crazy to go to sea? Why upon your first
voyage as a passenger, did you yourself feel such a mystical
vibration, when first told that you and your ship were now out of
sight of land? Why did the old Persians hold the sea holy? Why did the
Greeks give it a separate deity, and own brother of Jove? Surely all
this is not without meaning. And still deeper the meaning of that
story of Narcissus, who because he could not grasp the tormenting,
mild image he saw in the fountain, plunged into it and was
drowned. But that same image, we ourselves see in all rivers and
oceans. It is the image of the ungraspable phantom of life; and this
is the key to it all.
Now, when I say that I am in the habit of going to sea whenever I
begin to grow hazy about the eyes, and begin to be over conscious of
my lungs, I do not mean to have it inferred that I ever go to sea as a
passenger. For to go as a passenger you must needs have a purse, and a
purse is but a rag unless you have something in it. Besides,
passengers get sea-sick--grow quarrelsome--don't sleep of nights--do not
enjoy themselves much, as a general thing;--no, I never go as a
passenger; nor, though I am something of a salt, do I ever go to sea
as a Commodore, or a Captain, or a Cook. I abandon the glory and
distinction of such offices to those who like them. For my part, I
abominate all honourable respectable toils, trials, and tribulations
of every kind whatsoever. It is quite as much as I can do to take care
of myself, without taking care of ships, barques, brigs, schooners,
and what not. And as for going as cook,--though I confess there is
considerable glory in that, a cook being a sort of officer on
ship-board--yet, somehow, I never fancied broiling fowls;--though once
broiled, judiciously buttered, and judgmatically salted and peppered,
there is no one who will speak more respectfully, not to say
reverentially, of a broiled fowl than I will. It is out of the
idolatrous dotings of the old Egyptians upon broiled ibis and roasted
river horse, that you see the mummies of those creatures in their huge
bake-houses the pyramids.
No, when I go to sea, I go as a simple sailor, right before the mast,
plumb down into the forecastle, aloft there to the royal
mast-head. True, they rather order me about some, and make me jump
from spar to spar, like a grasshopper in a May meadow. And at first,
this sort of thing is unpleasant enough. It touches one's sense of
honour, particularly if you come of an old established family in the
land, the Van Rensselaers, or Randolphs, or Hardicanutes. And more
than all, if just previous to putting your hand into the tar-pot, you
have been lording it as a country schoolmaster, making the tallest
boys stand in awe of you. The transition is a keen one, I assure you,
from a schoolmaster to a sailor, and requires a strong decoction of
Seneca and the Stoics to enable you to grin and bear it. But even this
wears off in time.
What of it, if some old hunks of a sea-captain orders me to get a
broom and sweep down the decks? What does that indignity amount to,
weighed, I mean, in the scales of the New Testament? Do you think the
archangel Gabriel thinks anything the less of me, because I promptly
and respectfully obey that old hunks in that particular instance? Who
ain't a slave? Tell me that. Well, then, however the old sea-captains
may order me about--however they may thump and punch me about, I have
the satisfaction of knowing that it is all right; that everybody else
is one way or other served in much the same way--either in a physical
or metaphysical point of view, that is; and so the universal thump is
passed round, and all hands should rub each other's shoulder-blades,
and be content.
Again, I always go to sea as a sailor, because they make a point of
paying me for my trouble, whereas they never pay passengers a single
penny that I ever heard of. On the contrary, passengers themselves
must pay. And there is all the difference in the world between paying
and being paid. The act of paying is perhaps the most uncomfortable
infliction that the two orchard thieves entailed upon us. But BEING
PAID,--what will compare with it? The urbane activity with which a man
receives money is really marvellous, considering that we so earnestly
believe money to be the root of all earthly ills, and that on no
account can a monied man enter heaven. Ah! how cheerfully we consign
ourselves to perdition!
Finally, I always go to sea as a sailor, because of the wholesome
exercise and pure air of the fore-castle deck. For as in this world,
head winds are far more prevalent than winds from astern (that is, if
you never violate the Pythagorean maxim), so for the most part the
Commodore on the quarter-deck gets his atmosphere at second hand from
the sailors on the forecastle. He thinks he breathes it first; but not
so. In much the same way do the commonalty lead their leaders in many
other things, at the same time that the leaders little suspect it. But
wherefore it was that after having repeatedly smelt the sea as a
merchant sailor, I should now take it into my head to go on a whaling
voyage; this the invisible police officer of the Fates, who has the
constant surveillance of me, and secretly dogs me, and influences me
in some unaccountable way--he can better answer than any one else. And,
doubtless, my going on this whaling voyage, formed part of the grand
programme of Providence that was drawn up a long time ago. It came in
as a sort of brief interlude and solo between more extensive
performances. I take it that this part of the bill must have run
something like this:
"GRAND CONTESTED ELECTION FOR THE PRESIDENCY OF THE UNITED
STATES. "WHALING VOYAGE BY ONE ISHMAEL. "BLOODY BATTLE IN
AFFGHANISTAN."
Though I cannot tell why it was exactly that those stage managers, the
Fates, put me down for this shabby part of a whaling voyage, when
others were set down for magnificent parts in high tragedies, and
short and easy parts in genteel comedies, and jolly parts in
farces--though I cannot tell why this was exactly; yet, now that I
recall all the circumstances, I think I can see a little into the
springs and motives which being cunningly presented to me under
various disguises, induced me to set about performing the part I did,
besides cajoling me into the delusion that it was a choice resulting
from my own unbiased freewill and discriminating judgment.
Chief among these motives was the overwhelming idea of the great whale
himself. Such a portentous and mysterious monster roused all my
curiosity. Then the wild and distant seas where he rolled his island
bulk; the undeliverable, nameless perils of the whale; these, with all
the attending marvels of a thousand Patagonian sights and sounds,
helped to sway me to my wish. With other men, perhaps, such things
would not have been inducements; but as for me, I am tormented with an
everlasting itch for things remote. I love to sail forbidden seas, and
land on barbarous coasts. Not ignoring what is good, I am quick to
perceive a horror, and could still be social with it--would they let
me--since it is but well to be on friendly terms with all the inmates
of the place one lodges in.
By reason of these things, then, the whaling voyage was welcome; the
great flood-gates of the wonder-world swung open, and in the wild
conceits that swayed me to my purpose, two and two there floated into
my inmost soul, endless processions of the whale, and, mid most of
them all, one grand hooded phantom, like a snow hill in the air.
I stuffed a shirt or two into my old carpet-bag, tucked it under my
arm, and started for Cape Horn and the Pacific. Quitting the good city
of old Manhatto, I duly arrived in New Bedford. It was a Saturday
night in December. Much was I disappointed upon learning that the
little packet for Nantucket had already sailed, and that no way of
reaching that place would offer, till the following Monday.
As most young candidates for the pains and penalties of whaling stop
at this same New Bedford, thence to embark on their voyage, it may as
well be related that I, for one, had no idea of so doing. For my mind
was made up to sail in no other than a Nantucket craft, because there
was a fine, boisterous something about everything connected with that
famous old island, which amazingly pleased me. Besides though New
Bedford has of late been gradually monopolising the business of
whaling, and though in this matter poor old Nantucket is now much
behind her, yet Nantucket was her great original--the Tyre of this
Carthage;--the place where the first dead American whale was
stranded. Where else but from Nantucket did those aboriginal whalemen,
the Red-Men, first sally out in canoes to give chase to the Leviathan?
And where but from Nantucket, too, did that first adventurous little
sloop put forth, partly laden with imported cobblestones--so goes the
story--to throw at the whales, in order to discover when they were nigh
enough to risk a harpoon from the bowsprit?
Now having a night, a day, and still another night following before me
in New Bedford, ere I could embark for my destined port, it became a
matter of concernment where I was to eat and sleep meanwhile. It was a
very dubious-looking, nay, a very dark and dismal night, bitingly cold
and cheerless. I knew no one in the place. With anxious grapnels I had
sounded my pocket, and only brought up a few pieces of silver,--So,
wherever you go, Ishmael, said I to myself, as I stood in the middle
of a dreary street shouldering my bag, and comparing the gloom towards
the north with the darkness towards the south--wherever in your wisdom
you may conclude to lodge for the night, my dear Ishmael, be sure to
inquire the price, and don't be too particular.
With halting steps I paced the streets, and passed the sign of "The
Crossed Harpoons"--but it looked too expensive and jolly there. Further
on, from the bright red windows of the "Sword-Fish Inn," there came
such fervent rays, that it seemed to have melted the packed snow and
ice from before the house, for everywhere else the congealed frost lay
ten inches thick in a hard, asphaltic pavement,--rather weary for me,
when I struck my foot against the flinty projections, because from
hard, remorseless service the soles of my boots were in a most
miserable plight. Too expensive and jolly, again thought I, pausing
one moment to watch the broad glare in the street, and hear the sounds
of the tinkling glasses within. But go on, Ishmael, said I at last;
don't you hear? get away from before the door; your patched boots are
stopping the way. So on I went. I now by instinct followed the streets
that took me waterward, for there, doubtless, were the cheapest, if
not the cheeriest inns.
Such dreary streets! blocks of blackness, not houses, on either hand,
and here and there a candle, like a candle moving about in a tomb. At
this hour of the night, of the last day of the week, that quarter of
the town proved all but deserted. But presently I came to a smoky
light proceeding from a low, wide building, the door of which stood
invitingly open. It had a careless look, as if it were meant for the
uses of the public; so, entering, the first thing I did was to stumble
over an ash-box in the porch. Ha! thought I, ha, as the flying
particles almost choked me, are these ashes from that destroyed city,
Gomorrah? But "The Crossed Harpoons," and "The Sword-Fish?"--this, then
must needs be the sign of "The Trap." However, I picked myself up and
hearing a loud voice within, pushed on and opened a second, interior
door.
It seemed the great Black Parliament sitting in Tophet. A hundred
black faces turned round in their rows to peer; and beyond, a black
Angel of Doom was beating a book in a pulpit. It was a negro church;
and the preacher's text was about the blackness of darkness, and the
weeping and wailing and teeth-gnashing there. Ha, Ishmael, muttered I,
backing out, Wretched entertainment at the sign of 'The Trap!'
Moving on, I at last came to a dim sort of light not far from the
docks, and heard a forlorn creaking in the air; and looking up, saw a
swinging sign over the door with a white painting upon it, faintly
representing a tall straight jet of misty spray, and these words
underneath--"The Spouter Inn:--Peter Coffin."
Coffin?--Spouter?--Rather ominous in that particular connexion, thought
I. But it is a common name in Nantucket, they say, and I suppose this
Peter here is an emigrant from there. As the light looked so dim, and
the place, for the time, looked quiet enough, and the dilapidated
little wooden house itself looked as if it might have been carted here
from the ruins of some burnt district, and as the swinging sign had a
poverty-stricken sort of creak to it, I thought that here was the very
spot for cheap lodgings, and the best of pea coffee.
It was a queer sort of place--a gable-ended old house, one side palsied
as it were, and leaning over sadly. It stood on a sharp bleak corner,
where that tempestuous wind Euroclydon kept up a worse howling than
ever it did about poor Paul's tossed craft. Euroclydon, nevertheless,
is a mighty pleasant zephyr to any one in-doors, with his feet on the
hob quietly toasting for bed. "In judging of that tempestuous wind
called Euroclydon," says an old writer--of whose works I possess the
only copy extant--"it maketh a marvellous difference, whether thou
lookest out at it from a glass window where the frost is all on the
outside, or whether thou observest it from that sashless window, where
the frost is on both sides, and of which the wight Death is the only
glazier." True enough, thought I, as this passage occurred to my
mind--old black-letter, thou reasonest well. Yes, these eyes are
windows, and this body of mine is the house. What a pity they didn't
stop up the chinks and the crannies though, and thrust in a little
lint here and there. But it's too late to make any improvements
now. The universe is finished; the copestone is on, and the chips were
carted off a million years ago. Poor Lazarus there, chattering his
teeth against the curbstone for his pillow, and shaking off his
tatters with his shiverings, he might plug up both ears with rags, and
put a corn-cob into his mouth, and yet that would not keep out the
tempestuous Euroclydon. Euroclydon! says old Dives, in his red silken
wrapper--(he had a redder one afterwards) pooh, pooh! What a fine
frosty night; how Orion glitters; what northern lights! Let them talk
of their oriental summer climes of everlasting conservatories; give me
the privilege of making my own summer with my own coals.
But what thinks Lazarus? Can he warm his blue hands by holding them up
to the grand northern lights? Would not Lazarus rather be in Sumatra
than here? Would he not far rather lay him down lengthwise along the
line of the equator; yea, ye gods! go down to the fiery pit itself, in
order to keep out this frost?
Now, that Lazarus should lie stranded there on the curbstone before
the door of Dives, this is more wonderful than that an iceberg should
be moored to one of the Moluccas. Yet Dives himself, he too lives like
a Czar in an ice palace made of frozen sighs, and being a president of
a temperance society, he only drinks the tepid tears of orphans.
But no more of this blubbering now, we are going a-whaling, and there
is plenty of that yet to come. Let us scrape the ice from our frosted
feet, and see what sort of a place this "Spouter" may be.
